# <p align="center"> How to create a Virtual Environment in Python? </p>
---

## Why Use Virtual Environements?
Imagine you’re working on multiple Python projects simultaneously, each requiring different versions of libraries or even Python itself. Without virtual environments, managing these dependencies can quickly become chaotic. Here’s where virtual environments come to the rescue:
1. **Dependency Isolation:** Each project can have its own dependencies without worrying about conflicts with other projects.
2. **Version Management:** It allows you to use different versions of Python packages across different projects.
3. **Clean Setup:** Virtual environments prevent the global installation of packages, keeping your system Python clean and avoiding potential permission issues.
4. **Reproducibility:** When using virtual environments and a requirements.txt file, others can easily replicate the exact environment needed to run your project.

## Creating a Virutal Environment
### 1. Install `virtualenv`:
```
python -m pip install virtualenv
```

### 2. Create the Virtual Environment:
```
python<version> -m venv <virtual-enviroment-name>
```
**For example:**
```
python -m venv env
```
### 3. Activate the Virtual Environment
* **On Unix or MacOS:**
```
source env/bin/activate
```
* **For Windows Users:**
```
.\env\Scripts\activate
```
### 4. Deactivating the Virtual Environment
```
deactivate
```

## General Python's Virtual Environment Commands
### 1. Check Installed Dependencies
To view all the packages installed within your virtual environment.
```
pip list
```
### 2. Export Installed Packages to a File:
You can export a list of all installed package along with their versions to requirements file.
```
pip freeze > requiremenets.txt
```
### 3. Install Dependencies from a File
If you have requirements file generated by `pip freeze`, you can install all the dependencies listed in it.
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```



