Java/Gradle/README.md, before:

# <p align="center"> Introduction to Gradle </p>
---

## **Java Application with Gradle**
* **Structuring and Organizing Gradle Projects**
```
root-project/     
├── settings.gradle
├── build.gradle 
├── app/                
│   ├── build.gradle        
│   └── src/
├── core/               
│   ├── build.gradle        
│   └── src/
└── util/               
    ├── build.gradle        
    └── src/
```
* **Create the main source directory structure**
```sh
mkdir -p src/main/java,src/test/java,src/main/resources,src/test/resources
```

> [!TIP]
> Use gradle init for creating gradle project from terminal
> ```
> gradle init --type java-application --dsl groovy --test-framework junit-jupiter --package grd.fs --project-name grd-basic --no-split-project --java-version 17
> ```

* `settings.gradle` file
```groovy
rootProject.name = 'my-project'
include('app', 'core', 'util')
```

* `build.gradle` file
```groovy
// build.gradle
plugins {
    id 'java' 
}

repositories {
    mavenCentral() 
}

dependencies {
    constraints {
        implementation 'org.apache.commons:commons-text:1.13.0' 
    }

    testImplementation 'org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.12.1' 

    testRuntimeOnly 'org.junit.platform:junit-platform-launcher'
}

tasks.named('test') {
    useJUnitPlatform() 
}
```
* (1) we have java plugin to have all functionality for building Java projects available.
* (2) We declare a repository - `mavenCentral()` as source for external dependencies
* (3) We define dependency contraints as well as standard dependencies that are shared by all subprojects and set JUnit 5 as testing framework (4)

* Libraries your project needs to compile, run, or test. Types of dependencies:
    * `implementation` → runtime + compile
    * `compileOnly` → compile only
    * `runtimeOnly` → runtime only
    * `testImplementation` → test dependencies

* Plugins add extra capabilities to the project. Common plugins:
    * `java` → standard Java compilation tasks
    * `application` → adds run task for Java apps
    * `org.springframework.boot` → adds bootRun, packaging, and Spring Boot conventions
    * `maven-publish` → enables publishing artifacts to repositories

### Declaring Dependencies
Let’s look at an example of adding some dependencies (Spring and Hibernate) using several different ways:
```groovy
dependencies {
    implementation group: 
      'org.springframework', name: 'spring-core', version: '4.3.5.RELEASE'
    implementation 'org.springframework:spring-core:4.3.5.RELEASE',
            'org.springframework:spring-aop:4.3.5.RELEASE'
    implementation(
        [group: 'org.springframework', name: 'spring-core', version: '4.3.5.RELEASE'],
        [group: 'org.springframework', name: 'spring-aop', version: '4.3.5.RELEASE']
    )
    testImplementation('org.hibernate:hibernate-core:5.2.12.Final') {
        transitive = true
    }
    runtimeOnly(group: 'org.hibernate', name: 'hibernate-core', version: '5.2.12.Final') {
        transitive = false
    }
}
```
```groovy
implementation files('libs/joda-time-2.2.jar', 'libs/junit-4.12.jar')
implementation fileTree(dir: 'libs', include: '*.jar')
```

To add dependencies to any local files, we can use something like this:
```groovy
implementation files('libs/joda-time-2.2.jar', 'libs/junit-4.12.jar')
implementation fileTree(dir: 'libs', include: '*.jar')
```

*You can run the application by executing the run task from the Application plugin in the project root:
```sh
gradle -q run
```

---
## **Spring Boot with Gradle**

* **settings.gradle**
```groovy
rootProject.name = 'getting-started-springboot-with-gradle'
```

* **build.gradle**
```groovy
plugins {
	id 'java'
	id 'org.springframework.boot' version '4.0.0'
	id 'io.spring.dependency-management' version '1.1.7'
	id 'org.asciidoctor.jvm.convert' version '4.0.5'
}

group = 'com.grdl.fs'
version = '0.0.1-SNAPSHOT'
description = 'Demo project for Spring Boot'

java {
	toolchain {
		languageVersion = JavaLanguageVersion.of(17)
	}
}

configurations {
	compileOnly {
		extendsFrom annotationProcessor
	}
}

repositories {
	mavenCentral()
}

ext {
	set('snippetsDir', file("build/generated-snippets"))
}

dependencies {
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa'
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-security'
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-validation'
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-webmvc'
	compileOnly 'org.projectlombok:lombok'
	developmentOnly 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-devtools'
	runtimeOnly 'org.postgresql:postgresql'
	annotationProcessor 'org.projectlombok:lombok'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-security-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-validation-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-webmvc-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.restdocs:spring-restdocs-mockmvc'
	testRuntimeOnly 'org.junit.platform:junit-platform-launcher'
}

tasks.named('test') {
	outputs.dir snippetsDir
	useJUnitPlatform()
}

tasks.named('asciidoctor') {
	inputs.dir snippetsDir
	dependsOn test
}
```
### **Generating Wrapper Files**
To use Wrapper, we need to generate some particular files. **We’ll generate these files using the built-in Gradle task called wrapper**. Note that we need to generate these files only once.

Now, let’s run the wrapper task in our project directory:
```sh
gradle wrapper
```
Let's have a look at:
* `gradle-wrapper.jar` contains code for downloading the Gradle distribution specified in the `gradle-wrapper.properties` file
* `gradle-wrapper.properties` contains Wrapper runtime properties — most importantly, the version of the Gradle distribution that is compatible with the current project
By default, the _wrapper_ task generates Wrapper files with the Gradle version currently installed on the machine. We can specify another version if needed:
```sh
gradle wrapper --gradle-version 6.3
```

Always checking the Wrapper files inside the source control system like GitHub. **This way ensure that other developers can run the project without the need to install Gradle**.

> [!NOTE]
> Global `.gitignore` that ignores all `.jar` files. We need to add the _gradle-wrapper.jar_ file to git forcefully:
> ```sh
> git add -f gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.jar
> ```

### **Gradle cache and deleting the cache**
You can refresh dependencies in your cache with the command line option `--refresh-dependencies`. You can also delete the cached files under _~/.gradle/caches_. With the next build Gradle attempts to download the dependencies again.

### **Creating custom Gradle tasks**
A first minimalistic task in a `build.gradle` file has been created.
```groovy
task hello {
	doLast {
		println 'Hello Gradle'
	}
}
```
When running the `gradle -q task` task with this `build.gradle` file, the `hello` task will be listed under "**Other tasks**"

Groups can be applied with the `group` property and a description can be applied by using the `description` property. In case the group already exists the `hello` task is added to it. If the group does not exist, it is created.
```groovy
task hello {
     group 'groupCustom'
     description 'The hello task greets Gradle by saying "Hello Gradle"'

     doFirst {
        println 'Hello Gradle'
     }
     doLast {
        println 'Bye bye Gradle'
     }
}
```

### **Gradle Testing**
#### **Display test result in the console**
We add the `testLogging` events to tell Gradle what kind of test events should display in the console.
```groovy
// File: build.gradle
test {
	testLogging {
		events "PASSED", "SKIPPED", "FAILED", "STANDARD_OUT", "STANDARD_ERROR"
	}
}
```
Review the TestLogEvent, it consist of 6 events:
* `FAILED` – A test has failed.
* `PASSED` – A test has passed.
* `SKIPPED` – A test has been skipped.
* `STANDARD_ERROR` – A test has written a message to standard error.
* `STANDARD_OUT` – A test has written a message to standard out.
* `STARTED` – A test has started.
Generally, the following 3 events should be enough for most use cases: ```events "PASSED", "SKIPPED", "FAILED"```

* Run tests from a single unit test class
```
gradle cleanTest test --tests com.demo.AppTest.
```
> [!NOTE]
> We can use `cleanTest` to force Gradle always to run the previously passed tests, even the tests are unmodified.

* `gradle test` generates the following HTML test report by default:
```
{project}\build\reports\tests\test\index.html
```












---
## Referrence
* [Building Java Applications with libraries Sample](https://docs.gradle.org/current/samples/sample_building_java_applications_multi_project.html)

Commit message:

Added Build Jar from Gradle

Java/Gradle/README.md, after:

# <p align="center"> Introduction to Gradle </p>
---

## **Java Application with Gradle**
* **Structuring and Organizing Gradle Projects**
```
root-project/     
├── settings.gradle
├── build.gradle 
├── app/                
│   ├── build.gradle        
│   └── src/
├── core/               
│   ├── build.gradle        
│   └── src/
└── util/               
    ├── build.gradle        
    └── src/
```
* **Create the main source directory structure**
```sh
mkdir -p src/main/java,src/test/java,src/main/resources,src/test/resources
```

> [!TIP]
> Use gradle init for creating gradle project from terminal
> ```
> gradle init --type java-application --dsl groovy --test-framework junit-jupiter --package grd.fs --project-name grd-basic --no-split-project --java-version 17
> ```

* `settings.gradle` file
```groovy
rootProject.name = 'my-project'
include('app', 'core', 'util')
```

* `build.gradle` file
```groovy
// build.gradle
plugins {
    id 'java' 
}

repositories {
    mavenCentral() 
}

dependencies {
    constraints {
        implementation 'org.apache.commons:commons-text:1.13.0' 
    }

    testImplementation 'org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.12.1' 

    testRuntimeOnly 'org.junit.platform:junit-platform-launcher'
}

tasks.named('test') {
    useJUnitPlatform() 
}
```
* (1) we have java plugin to have all functionality for building Java projects available.
* (2) We declare a repository - `mavenCentral()` as source for external dependencies
* (3) We define dependency contraints as well as standard dependencies that are shared by all subprojects and set JUnit 5 as testing framework (4)

* Libraries your project needs to compile, run, or test. Types of dependencies:
    * `implementation` → runtime + compile
    * `compileOnly` → compile only
    * `runtimeOnly` → runtime only
    * `testImplementation` → test dependencies

* Plugins add extra capabilities to the project. Common plugins:
    * `java` → standard Java compilation tasks
    * `application` → adds run task for Java apps
    * `org.springframework.boot` → adds bootRun, packaging, and Spring Boot conventions
    * `maven-publish` → enables publishing artifacts to repositories

### Declaring Dependencies
Let’s look at an example of adding some dependencies (Spring and Hibernate) using several different ways:
```groovy
dependencies {
    implementation group: 
      'org.springframework', name: 'spring-core', version: '4.3.5.RELEASE'
    implementation 'org.springframework:spring-core:4.3.5.RELEASE',
            'org.springframework:spring-aop:4.3.5.RELEASE'
    implementation(
        [group: 'org.springframework', name: 'spring-core', version: '4.3.5.RELEASE'],
        [group: 'org.springframework', name: 'spring-aop', version: '4.3.5.RELEASE']
    )
    testImplementation('org.hibernate:hibernate-core:5.2.12.Final') {
        transitive = true
    }
    runtimeOnly(group: 'org.hibernate', name: 'hibernate-core', version: '5.2.12.Final') {
        transitive = false
    }
}
```
```groovy
implementation files('libs/joda-time-2.2.jar', 'libs/junit-4.12.jar')
implementation fileTree(dir: 'libs', include: '*.jar')
```

To add dependencies to any local files, we can use something like this:
```groovy
implementation files('libs/joda-time-2.2.jar', 'libs/junit-4.12.jar')
implementation fileTree(dir: 'libs', include: '*.jar')
```

*You can run the application by executing the run task from the Application plugin in the project root:
```sh
gradle -q run
```

### Build and run an executable JAR 
This approach creates a self-contained, executable JAR file that can be run on any system with a compatible JDK installed, even without Gradle. 
1. **Configure the `jar` task** in your `build.gradle` to add the `Main-Class` attribute to the JAR's manifest:

```groovy
jar {
    manifest {
        attributes 'Main-Class': 'your.package.name.MainClassName'
    }
}
```
> [!NOTE]
> **Note on dependencies:** The standard `jar` task only includes your project's compiled classes, not external libraries (dependencies). To include all dependencies in a single `fat JAR` or `uber JAR` you typically need a specialized plugin like the Gradle Shadow Plugin.

2. **Build the JAR file** by running the `build` or `assemble` task:
```bash
gradle clean build
```
The generated JAR file will be located in the `build/libs` directory, typically named `your-project-name.jar`.

3. **Run the JAR file** from your command line using the `java --jar` command:
```bash
java -jar build/libs/your-project-name.jar
```

## **Spring Boot with Gradle**

* **settings.gradle**
```groovy
rootProject.name = 'getting-started-springboot-with-gradle'
```

* **build.gradle**
```groovy
plugins {
	id 'java'
	id 'org.springframework.boot' version '4.0.0'
	id 'io.spring.dependency-management' version '1.1.7'
	id 'org.asciidoctor.jvm.convert' version '4.0.5'
}

group = 'com.grdl.fs'
version = '0.0.1-SNAPSHOT'
description = 'Demo project for Spring Boot'

java {
	toolchain {
		languageVersion = JavaLanguageVersion.of(17)
	}
}

configurations {
	compileOnly {
		extendsFrom annotationProcessor
	}
}

repositories {
	mavenCentral()
}

ext {
	set('snippetsDir', file("build/generated-snippets"))
}

dependencies {
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa'
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-security'
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-validation'
	implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-webmvc'
	compileOnly 'org.projectlombok:lombok'
	developmentOnly 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-devtools'
	runtimeOnly 'org.postgresql:postgresql'
	annotationProcessor 'org.projectlombok:lombok'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-security-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-validation-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-webmvc-test'
	testImplementation 'org.springframework.restdocs:spring-restdocs-mockmvc'
	testRuntimeOnly 'org.junit.platform:junit-platform-launcher'
}

tasks.named('test') {
	outputs.dir snippetsDir
	useJUnitPlatform()
}

tasks.named('asciidoctor') {
	inputs.dir snippetsDir
	dependsOn test
}
```
### **Generating Wrapper Files**
To use Wrapper, we need to generate some particular files. **We’ll generate these files using the built-in Gradle task called wrapper**. Note that we need to generate these files only once.

Now, let’s run the wrapper task in our project directory:
```sh
gradle wrapper
```
Let's have a look at:
* `gradle-wrapper.jar` contains code for downloading the Gradle distribution specified in the `gradle-wrapper.properties` file
* `gradle-wrapper.properties` contains Wrapper runtime properties — most importantly, the version of the Gradle distribution that is compatible with the current project
By default, the _wrapper_ task generates Wrapper files with the Gradle version currently installed on the machine. We can specify another version if needed:
```sh
gradle wrapper --gradle-version 6.3
```

Always checking the Wrapper files inside the source control system like GitHub. **This way ensure that other developers can run the project without the need to install Gradle**.

> [!NOTE]
> Global `.gitignore` that ignores all `.jar` files. We need to add the _gradle-wrapper.jar_ file to git forcefully:
> ```sh
> git add -f gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.jar
> ```

### **Gradle cache and deleting the cache**
You can refresh dependencies in your cache with the command line option `--refresh-dependencies`. You can also delete the cached files under _~/.gradle/caches_. With the next build Gradle attempts to download the dependencies again.

### **Creating custom Gradle tasks**
A first minimalistic task in a `build.gradle` file has been created.
```groovy
task hello {
	doLast {
		println 'Hello Gradle'
	}
}
```
When running the `gradle -q task` task with this `build.gradle` file, the `hello` task will be listed under "**Other tasks**"

Groups can be applied with the `group` property and a description can be applied by using the `description` property. In case the group already exists the `hello` task is added to it. If the group does not exist, it is created.
```groovy
task hello {
     group 'groupCustom'
     description 'The hello task greets Gradle by saying "Hello Gradle"'

     doFirst {
        println 'Hello Gradle'
     }
     doLast {
        println 'Bye bye Gradle'
     }
}
```

### **Gradle Testing**
#### **Display test result in the console**
We add the `testLogging` events to tell Gradle what kind of test events should display in the console.
```groovy
// File: build.gradle
test {
	testLogging {
		events "PASSED", "SKIPPED", "FAILED", "STANDARD_OUT", "STANDARD_ERROR"
	}
}
```
Review the TestLogEvent, it consist of 6 events:
* `FAILED` – A test has failed.
* `PASSED` – A test has passed.
* `SKIPPED` – A test has been skipped.
* `STANDARD_ERROR` – A test has written a message to standard error.
* `STANDARD_OUT` – A test has written a message to standard out.
* `STARTED` – A test has started.
Generally, the following 3 events should be enough for most use cases: ```events "PASSED", "SKIPPED", "FAILED"```

* Run tests from a single unit test class
```
gradle cleanTest test --tests com.demo.AppTest.
```
> [!NOTE]
> We can use `cleanTest` to force Gradle always to run the previously passed tests, even the tests are unmodified.

* `gradle test` generates the following HTML test report by default:
```
{project}\build\reports\tests\test\index.html
```












---
## Referrence
* [Building Java Applications with libraries Sample](https://docs.gradle.org/current/samples/sample_building_java_applications_multi_project.html)
